vrajeśvarai: śaurivaco niśamya samāvrajannadhvani bhītacetā: |
niṣpiṣṭaniśśeṣataruṃ nirīkṣya kañcitpadārthaṃ śaraṇaṃ gatasvām ||1||
vrajeśvara:	the chieftain of Vraja (Nanda Gopa)
śauri-vaca: niśamya	the words of Vasudeva having heard
samāvrajan-adhvani	returning on the way
bhīta-cetā:	in utter fear (seeing)
niṣpiṣṭa-niśśeṣa-tarum	crushed all the trees
nirīkṣya kiñcit-padārtham	seeing (by) some indescribable object
śaraṇam gata:-tvām	took refuge in Thee (prayed to Thee)
The chieftain of Vraja, Nanda Gopa, having heard the words of Vasudeva, was returning home in a hurry. On the way he saw an indescribable form falling down and crushing all the trees around. In utter fear he took refuge in Thee and prayed to Thee.
niśamya gopīvacanādudantaṃ sarve'pi gopā bhayavismayāndhā: |
tvatpātitaṃ ghorapiśācadehaṃ dehurvidūre'tha kuṭhārakṛttam ||2||
niśamya gopī-vacanāt	hearing, by the words of the Gopikas
udantam	the news (story of Pootanaa)
sarve-api gopā:	all the Gopas
bhaya-vismaya-andhā:	by fear and wonder dumbfounded
tvat-pātitam	felled by Thee
ghora-piśāca-deham	the terrible monster's (Pootanaa's) body
dehu:-vidūre-atha	burnt far away, then,
kuṭhāra-kṛttam	(the body) by axes cut (into pieces)
The Gopas came to know of the whole incident of Pootanaa from the Gopikas and they were dumbfounded with fear and wonder. They then proceeded to cut the body of the terrible monster who was killed by Thee, into pieces with axes and burnt it at a distance.
tvatpītapūtastanataccharīrāt samuccalannuccataro hi dhūma: |
śaṅkāmadhādāgarava: kimeṣa kiṃ cāndano gaulgulavo'thaveti ||3||
tvat-pīta-pūta-stana-	by Thee sucked, the purified breasts, from (them)
tat-śarīrāt samuccalan-	(from that body) rising up profusely
uccatara: hi dhūma:	high up indeed the smoke
śaṅkām-adhāt-	(made) doubt to arise
agarava: kim-eṣa	(smell) of agaru is this,
kim cāndana:	(or) is it sandalwood
gaulgulava:-athavā-	or from gulgulu (frankincense)
iti	thus (the doubt)
The breasts of Pootanaa were made pure by Thy having sucked them. Therefore, when her body was burnt, huge volumes of smoke rose in the sky, so fragrant that it produced doubt in the minds of the people as to what it was - agaru, sandalwood, or gulgulu (frankincense) incense.
madaṅgasaṅgasya phalaṃ na dūre kṣaṇena tāvat bhavatāmapi syāt |
ityullapan vallavatallajebhya: tvaṃ pūtanāmātanuthā: sugandhim ||4||
mat-aṅga-saṅgasya	of my body's contact
phalaṃ na dūre	the fruit is not far
kṣaṇena tāvat	in no time then
bhavatām-api syāt	to you also will be (given)
iti-ullapan	thus saying (declaring)
vallava-tallajebhya:	to the higher ones of the cow-herds
tvam	Thou
pūtanām-atanuthā:	on Pootanaa conferred
sugandhim	fragrance (punya) (blessings)
Thou declared to the higher ones of the cowherd clan that the fruits of the contact with Thy body were not far behind, and that they too would get them soon. The conferring of fragrance / blessings on Pootanaa was, as though, to prove that.
citraṃ piśācyā na hata: kumāra: citraṃ puraivākathi śauriṇedam |
iti praśaṃsan kila gopaloko bhavanmukhālokarase nyamāṅkṣīt ||5||
citraṃ piśācyā	what a wonder, by the demoness
na hata: kumāra:	was not killed the boy
citraṃ purā-eva-	what a wonder earlier itself
akathi śauriṇā-idam	it was said by Shauri (Vasudeva), this
iti praśaṃsan	thus praising
kila gopaloka:	the cowherd people
bhavat-mukha-āloka-rase	in the joy of looking at Thy face
nyamāṅkṣīt	immersed
The cowherd people were wonder struck that the boy was not killed by the demoness. They also marvelled at the events foretold by Shauri Vasudeva. Realising this, they were fully immersed in the joy of looking at Thy face.
dinedine'tha prativṛddhalakṣmīrakṣīṇamāṅgalyaśato vrajo'yam |
bhavannivāsādayi vāsudeva pramodasāndra: parito vireje ||6||
dine-dine-atha	day by day then
prati-vṛddha-lakṣmī:-	increasing in prosperity
akṣīṇa-māṅgalya-śata:	(and) undiminished in numerous auspiciousness
vraja:-ayam	Gokul this
bhavat-nivāsāt-	by Thy living there
ayi vāsudeva	O Vaasudeva!
pramoda-sāndra:	full of happiness
parita: vireje	every where shone
O Vaasudeva! Day by day this Gokul developed with prosperity and undiminished auspiciousness as a result of Thy living there. Happiness and undecaying virtue shone everywhere.
gṛheṣu te komalarūpahāsamitha:kathāsaṅkulitā: kamanya: |
vṛtteṣu kṛtyeṣu bhavannirīkṣāsamāgatā: pratyahamatyanandan ||7||
gṛheṣu	in (their) house
te komala-rūpa-hāsa-	Thy delicate form and smile
mitha:-kathā-saṅkulitā:	mutually narrated, gathering together
kamanya:	the beautiful (Gopikas)
vṛtteṣu kṛtyeṣu	having completed their daily chores
bhavat-nirīkṣā-samāgatā:	to watch Thee, assembled
prati-ahan-ati-anandan	every day, in great joy
In their houses the beautiful Gopikas kept talking to each other about Thy charming form and smile. Having completed their daily chores they assembled in great joy to watch Thee.
aho kumāro mayi dattadṛṣṭi: smitaṃ kṛtaṃ māṃ prati vatsakena |
ehyehi māmityupasārya pāṇī tvayīśa kiṃ kiṃ na kṛtaṃ vadhūbhi: ||8||
aho kumāra:	O! the boy
mayi datta-dṛṣṭi:	at me looked
smitaṃ kṛtaṃ māṃ prati	smile was made in my direction
vatsakena	by the child
ehi-ehi mām-iti	come come to me, thus
upasārya pāṇī	stretching out the hands
tvayi-īśa	towards Thee O Lord!
kiṃ kiṃ na kṛtaṃ vadhūbhi:	what all was not done by the women
O the boy is looking at me,' 'his smile is directed towards me', 'come, come to me', thus remarking they stretched out their hands to hold Thee. O Lord! What all was not done by the Gopikas endearingly.
bhavadvapu:sparśanakautukena karātkaraṃ gopavadhūjanena |
nītastvamātāmrasarojamālāvyālambilolambatulāmalāsī: ||9||
bhavat-vapu:-	Thy body
sparśana-kautukena	in the eagerness to touch
karāt-karaṃ	from hand to hand
gopa-vadhū-janena	by the Gopika women
nīta:-tvam-	were taken Thou
ātāmra-saroja-mālā-	very red lotus garland
vyālambi-lolamba-	(as though on it) moving about, a beetle
tulām-alāsī:	resemblance Thou took on
They passed Thee from hand to hand, each one of them eager to touch Thy body. As they did so, Thou looked like a honey beetle moving from one very red lotus to another strung together in a garland.
nipāyayantī stanamaṅkagaṃ tvāṃ vilokayantī vadanaṃ hasantī |
daśāṃ yaśodā katamāṃ na bheje sa tādṛśa: pāhi hare gadānmām ||10||
nipāyayantī stanam-	feeding the breasts
aṅkagaṃ tvām	to who were in the lap, Thee
vilokayantī vadanam	admiring the face
hasantī	(and) smiling
daśāṃ yaśodā katamāṃ	states (of joy), Yashodaa, what all
na bheje	did not attain
sa tādṛśa: pāhi	That (Thee) who are such, save
hare gadān-mām	O Lord Hari! Me from diseases
O ! What states of joy did Yashodaa, Nanda's wife, not attain as she took Thee in her lap and suckled Thee, with her eyes fixed on Thy smiling face. O Lord Hari! Who are thus! May Thou save me from all ailments.